# vibecheck

Youtube video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZZ3IOmW4CpU&t=1366s  
Original tweet thread that inspired this: https://twitter.com/showerinsights/status/1504959266146324489?s=20&t=oRXx68B7HfdNSh-1xj5IGA)  
Tweet thread with commentary and link to extension ideas: https://twitter.com/avshrikumar/status/1508156479722823680?s=20&t=zNP1wn8V0lZtFVt4gojcXA  

Scattered thoughts below.

## What is a 'vibe'?

A vibe is a multidimensional standing wave oscillation. To represent a vibe, we perform the mutlidimensional equivalent of a fourier series decomposition on the vibe. This decomposition results in a complex-valued vector of some (potentially infinite?) dimension, where each entry in the vector denotes the amplitude and phase for a particular 'basis oscillation' (I'm told this type of decomposition is possible but I don't know the specifics; I know it's linked to s-p-d-f orbitals from quantum chemistry and was used in [Tensor Field Networks](https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.08219)).

A few things to note:

'Standing wave' means the wave does not 'propagate' anywhere; it just oscillates in-place. E.g. a 1d standing wave would be like a string on an instrument; you pluck it, and it vibrates in-place, and you can describe the vibration by an amplitude and frequency. If you wanted to describe
the motion of this 1d vibration in real time, you could use polar co-ordinates (i.e. complex numbers), where the distance-from-origin would represent the amplitude of the vibration (which, in the case of a stringed instrument, decays over time as the note fades), and the angle in polar co-ordinates would represent the phase of the vibration. In the case of a plucked string, the decaying note would (in polar co-ordinates) correspond to the motion of an inward, decaying spiral.

A 2d standing wave would (I think) be like a trampoline; a jumper jumps on it, and the fabric of the trampoline wobbles up and down in response. If many people jump on a trampoline at once, the motion of the fabric of the trampoline can look quite complicated. However, the trampoline itself is not shifting around in space (or at least, you hope it does not, for the safety of the people jumping on it!).

A 3d standing wave is...well I'm told they look something like the s-p-d-f electron orbitals from quantum chemistry, and that these shapes are in turn connected to Schroedinger's equation, but that's about all I know...

Anyway, from a modeling perspective, all that matters is that this 'multidimensional equivalent of a fourier series decomposition' is possible, since we can use this to represent the oscillations of reality as a complex-valued vector.
 
## What is the 'physical world' as per vibe theory?  

Let's postulate that the 'full world' is comprised of many vibes all superimposed together. If we were to do an equivalent-of-a-fourier-series decomposition on the 'full world vibe', the 'physical world' would correspond to certain very high frequency components in the vibe.

Reasoning: the physical world is all about boundaries and delineations. We know from signal processing 101 that sharp transitions in a signal correspond to high-frequency components in a fourier series decomposition. It thus stands to reason that a signal approximating the properties of the physical world, with so many sharp edges and complicated boundaries, would be comprised of many high-frequency (and thus high energy) components. This is consistent with the fact that, in physics, it is known that (a) higher frequency oscillations take more energy than lower-frequency oscillations of the same amplitude, and (b) the formula E=mc2 describes how mass is highly concentrated energy, which is compatible with the idea that mass is represented as a high-frequency component in reality's vibe. Finally, there is a third (evolutionary) reason for 'physical' boundaries to correspond to high-energy components; the term of 'physical world' connotes the idea of 'agreed upon by everyone'; signal encoded using high-energy frequencies are less likely to be garbled by accidental noise, and are thus more likely to be 'agreed upon by everyone'; therefore, it stands to reason that what we call our objective reality would correspond mainly to high-energy (i.e. high-frequency) signals.

Note that to get the appearance of causality (e.g. laws of motion), we need not only the arrow of time but also 'reaction rules' governing how the vibe changes as a function of its present state. The causal rules can be thought of as the 'first derivative' of the vibe vector w.r.t. time. We can further constrain all the allowed causal rules to satisfy a 'conservation of energy' rule. That is, for some function mapping a given vibe to a scalar value of energy, the first derivative of this function w.r.t. the arrow of time must be zero. I suspect modern physics has an answer already to the relationship between the frequency of an oscillation and the energy at a given amplitude, which I could just borrow.

So, to sum up: the idea is that in order to get the 'physical world', we take all the vibes and superimpose them to get the collective vibe. In the process of superimposing, some sharp transitions may appear. These sharp transitions, which require very high-frequency oscillations to define, are what we call the 'physical world'.


## How can we understand the difference between the conscious and unconscious mind in terms of vibe theory?

Let us think of a 'conscious self' in vibe theory as a combination of two things:
 1. An 'attention agent' that 'tunes in' to only certain components of the collective vibe vector (these are the components that the attention agent is said to 'experience'), and
 2. A set of 'response rules' that make changes to the collective vibe depending on the 'experience' of the attention agent

The part that we are conscious of is only the 'experience of the attention agent'. We are NOT automatically privy to what all the 'response rules' attached to the experience are, though we can figure them out by noting patterns in the correspondence between 'what we focus attention on' and 'how our experience changes'.

Under this model, an attention agent can 'talk to itself' in the following way:
1. The attention agent concentrates attention on a concept (in vibe theory, a 'concept' could be represented as a particular multidimensional oscillation). E.g. it 'thinks about an orange' (and thus tunes into the components of the vibe vector that represent the concept of an orange, according to the attention agent). This is analogous to the attention agent asking itself a question (where the question is 'what are my associations with the idea of an orange?'.
2. The attention agent observes changes to its experience. For example, it may notice it experiences the sensation of hunger. This change can be thought of as the 'answer to the question' posed by the attention agent.
3. As a result of the answer received, the attention agent can now modify its attention to 'ask the next question'. For example, it could direct attention to a timekeeping device to effectively ask itself what the time is.

Given this notion of a 'conscious self' as an attention agent, how can we understand the split between the conscious and unconcious mind? In vibe theory, we can think of them as two entirely separate attention agents that are each largely tuned in to different 'frequencies' (components) in the collective vibe, and where the 'unconscious mind' only communicates with the 'conscious mind' through what the 'conscious mind' calls 'feelings'. Indeed, taking inspiration from psychoanalysis, we could say that the UM ('unconscious mind') has learned to 'hide' its 'communication frequencies' from the CM ('conscious mind') to 'protect itself' from meddling, because the CM can't stand to hear the things the UM has to say and always tries to 'silence' the UM (silencing something can be thought of as generating a 'destructive interference' vibe to cancel it out?). Alternatively, the CM just hides from the UM when it sees something in the UM that it doesn't like (hiding from something can be modeled as the attention agent finding ways to 'tune out' those frequencies). When the CM chooses, one way or another, to not listen to most of the UM's comunication frequencies, then the UM is limited to communicating with the CM only via vague feelings. Because the 'logic' leading up to the feelings was (intentionally) hidden from the CM by the UM, the CM can experience the feelings as 'coming out of nowhere' and 'making no sense'. Not surprising given that all of the 'higher reasoning rules' (that are attached to the communication frequencies that the CM typically uses) can't be accessed by the UM, as the UM is not permitted by the CM to 'talk' on those freqeuncies!

(As an aside, because 'higher reasoning' involves 'precisely defined concepts', it likely uses higher-energy frequencies than vague 'associative reasoning' cos of the aforementioned sharp-transitions-correspond-to-higher-energy-components rationale mentioned in the section on 'physical' reality)

Another sad consequence of having a big 'split' in communication frequencies (i.e. a drawback of shoving a lot of stuff into the UM) is that all the experiential frequencies that the UM is using are not being attended to at all by the CM, thus limiting not only the experience of the CM, but also the complexity of the internal dialogue that the CM could be having with itself.

Note that 'different people' can be modeled using pretty much exactly the same type of conceptual split needed to separate the UM from the CM. We can't (normally) hear other people's thoughts because each person typically uses a *completely* different set of frequencies for internal communication. Thus, for communication with others, we typically resort to the very high-energy channels of the 'physical world' (i.e. sound and vision), as these are channels that everyone tends to be tuned into. Also, as before, note that there is value in investing in high-effort communication between entites that are not in constant contact with each other, because when communication is rare it is important that the communication have few errors, and high-energy channels are presumably less prone to communcation errors.  
Huh. Maybe a "force" is generated whenever one perceiver sees time as moving much faster than the others around it? And the 'force' is the 'energy transference' (between different frequencies of the vibe) to "reconcile the perceptions"?  
I guess, if you decide objective reality is only the 'real' component of the vibe, then all the possible different 'phase' information (note: the phase information basically defines how the vibe will evolve over time...you can think of the phase information as the "potential energy"), then there is *ambiguity* (from the perspective of the subjective observers) about what the missing phase information could be, and this missing phase information allows the subjective observers to better predict the future. And what if there is no definite phase information, rather the phase information is *sampled* from all the phases that could explain the *present state of the real values* accurately (while satisfying conservation of energy...). And maybe the sampling probabilities are influenced by people's subjective beliefs about what the phase information is likely to be. Prediction: by changing our beliefs, we change the probability distribution from which the future is sampled...

## Scattered notes to self:

Idea: "subjective" reality originates from different perceptions of how "fast" time was passing, so something that looks 'unacceptably fast' from one perspective is 'a totally reasonable speed' from another perspective? (I am thinking about the 'paradox of tolerance' and how 'advocating for your boundaries' can be viewed as 'attacking someone elses territory by force rather than redefining it through negotiation")

Idea: "objective reality" consists only of the magnitudes of each element in the collective vibe; "subjective reality" is the collective vibe 'explained' as a series of oscillations (i.e. both the real and complex components). The 'subjective reality' that "wins" (i.e. that gets to define the evolution of the collective vibe) is randomly sampled from all the subjective realities that fit the data equally well?

quick note: when projected onto a single dimension, the vibe can be represented as a value in polar co-ordinates with some radius (oscillation strength) and angle (oscillation phase)?

What if the deeper the subconscious mind (corresponding to lower-frequency oscillations), the "coarser" the scale at which the mind integrates information. Maybe this has something to do with the subconscious being good at heuristic thinking? the deeper the subconscious from which an experience originates, the more it represents soemthing like an integral at the scale of *all* of your experience?

Because constructive and destructive interference are only a phase shift away, if your PERCEIPTION is off by a phase shift, you might THINK you are constructively interfering but really you are destructively interfering. Inspired by the idea of time being an axis through which one rotates, and "desire"/"setting intentions" having something to do with "fast forwarding" through this rotation axis (I had said to my friend Dandelion that maybe intention has to do with causing rotations backwards in time to harmonize...maybe as much as something else rotates backwards in time, you have to 'rotate forward in time' in your subjective experience i.e. make a lot of choices about the future in advance? Kind of like saying "ok these are the decisions I will commit to making I cannot change them"? And in exchange for making those commitments, you get to exert the power to "rotate" a particular reality towards you? And all of that can backfire cos you don't know how your decisions about the future are going to ACTUALL interact constructively/destructively with vibes you are currently viewing through a distorted "lens" (looking forwards in time causes distortions...if you are off by a phase shift, you can destructively interfere where you meant to constructively interfere. Also, FEAR causes distortions...maybe FEAR is what clouds our ability to observe the phase of other people's oscillations correctly; so as with Mark Gubrud, who prob thought he was coming across as a loving dad but actually was coming across as an abusive boyfriend...)
